.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: © 2025 Corn
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GFDL-1.3-or-later

.TH PYROM-RESOLVE "1" "July 2025" "pyrom-resolve 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pyrom-resolve \- PyRom utility for finding correct ROM names
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY
.B
pyrom\-resolve 
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR CHECKS ]
.RB [ \-m ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR OUTPUT ]
.RB [ \-q ]
.B \-d
.I DATFILES 
.RI [ DATFILES ...] 
.B \-f
.I ROMFILES
.RI [ ROMFILES ...] 
.YS
.SS "options:"
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
show this help message and exit
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
show program's version number and exit
.TP
\fB\-d\fR DATFILES [DATFILES ...], \fB\-\-datfiles\fR DATFILES [DATFILES ...]
DAT files acting as a source of names
.TP
\fB\-f\fR ROMFILES [ROMFILES ...], \fB\-\-romfiles\fR ROMFILES [ROMFILES ...]
The roms for which correct names should be determined
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-lenient\fR
Do not use hash to check every candidate of matching
size, but possibly report false positives instead of
no match
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-report\-all\fR
Check for all possible matches (can be EXTREMELY
slow!)
.TP
\fB\-c\fR CHECKS, \fB\-\-checks\fR CHECKS
Comma\-separated list of checks to use ('size', 'crc',
\&'md5', 'sha1', 'sha256', 'xxh3', 'b3') (size always
used)
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-machine\-readable\fR
Display results in a machine\-readable format
.TP
\fB\-o\fR OUTPUT, \fB\-\-output\-file\fR OUTPUT
Name of a file file to write results to. Without this
option results are written to stdout. (You will likely
want to use this with the \fB\-\-machine\fR option)
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Less output
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pyrom-resolve 
determines potential correct names based on file size. Therefore, if your file has an incorrect size, it will not be able to find the correct name.
Afterwards, the found candidates will be confirmed with a hash, with the most likely candidate (determined via string distance) being checked first.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-report\-all
Due to the mechanism noted above, if a console has ROMs all with the same size (Xbox for example), then using this option will be extremely slow, since ALL files will have to be hashed.
.TP
.B \-\-lenient
Disables using hashes to verify candidates. Therefore, if only one potential match exists based on size, it will be returned.
If multiple candidates exist, the closest one based on string distance will be returned. If 
.B \-\-report\-all
is also specified, then ALL candidates will be returned.
