.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: © 2025 Corn
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GFDL-1.3-or-later

.TH PYROM "1" "July 2025" "pyrom 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pyrom \- utility for checking integrity of ROM files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY pyrom
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-S ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-m ]
.RB [ \-j
.IR THREADS ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR HASHERS ]
.RB [ \-\-strict ]
.RB [ \-u ]
.RB [ \-d
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.RB [ \-C
.IR CHECKS ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR OUTPUT ]
.RB [ \-q ]
.B files
.RI [ files ...]
.YS
.SY pyrom
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.YS
.SY pyrom
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.YS
.SS "positional arguments:"
.TP
.B files
DATfiles to get checksums from
.SS "options:"
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
show a help message and exit
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
show program's version number and exit
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-show\-failed\fR
Show a list of corrupted ROMs after checks are finished
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-show\-summary\fR
After checks are finished, display how many files are ok/missing/corrupt etc.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-show\-skipped\fR
Show a list of duplicate titles skipped
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-show\-missing\fR
Show a list of missing titles after checks are finished
.TP
\fB\-j\fR THREADS, \fB\-\-threads\fR THREADS
How many threads to use for reading files from disk (default = nproc/4)
.TP
\fB\-l\fR HASHERS, \fB\-\-hashers\fR HASHERS
How many hash checks to run in parallel (default = nproc/4)
.TP
\fB\-\-strict\fR
Match ROMs only if the directory they are in matches the console name
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-print\-unresolved\fR
Print all files that could not be matched to a game.
Note that unresolved files are not considered the
result and will always be printed to stdout. May
increase the runtime since ALL files in the target
directory will be checked.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR DIR, \fB\-\-dir\fR DIR
Root directory in which ROMs are stored (default is the current directory).
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-machine\-readable\fR
Display results in a machine\-readable format
.TP
\fB\-C\fR CHECKS, \fB\-\-disable\-checks\fR CHECKS
Comma\-separated list of checks to disable ('size', 'crc', 'md5', 'sha1', 'sha256', 'xxh3', 'b3')
.TP
\fB\-o\fR OUTPUT, \fB\-\-output\-file\fR OUTPUT
Name of a file file to write results to. Without this option results are written to stdout.
(You will likely want to use this with the \fB\-\-machine\fR option)
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Silence progress bars
.SH DESCRIPTION
When invoked, pyrom will first parse the provided files. These can either be normal DAT files or pyrom's custom format. Mixing them is permitted.
Then, it will walk the given directory (or the current one), assigning each file it finds that matches a known ROM, until it has walked all files or
assigned all ROMs. Any ROMs that did not have matching files will be marked as missing.

Note that pyrom searches for files according to their names - requiring strict naming (if you do not know the correct name of the file, use 
.MR pyrom\-morph 1
to retrieve it). It is not required to follow the naming convention for directories, though you can speed up resolving which files belong to which ROM
when there are duplicate names by using the 
.B \-\-strict
option.

On the topic of conflicts, if a file can belong to multiple ROMs (and therefore, logically, to multiple games), it will first be resolved according to the directory it is in -
either matching the game name or the console name. If that fails, it will be matched according to the size and if even that fails, crc will be attempted.
The game name, size and crc checks are skipped when 
.B \-\-strict 
is given. If it so happens that the ROMs are identical - all except one will be skipped, since the file is identical for all of them, there is no need
to check it multiple times.

Then, it will hash the file with each algorithm which was specified in the DAT files - if a single check fails, subsequent ones are cancelled
and the whole ROM as well as the Game it belongs to are marked as failed.
Lastly, it will print the statistics according to the options given. By default, this is like specifying '-Sf', i.e. summary + print failed games.
.SH OPTIONS
Some options have more nuance to them and are described at more length here.
.TP 
.B \-j|\-\-threads/\-l|\-\-hashers
The total number of OS threads that will be spawned in total is 
.IB threads * hashers + threads .
This is because each thread that loads a file starts its own ThreadPool for hashing.
You should also take into consideration the storage medium in which your files are stored -
if you have many extra threads, but are hosting your files on an HDD,
adding more threads will likely overwhelm your disk instead of providing any speedups.
.TP
.B \-o|\-\-output
Note that using 
.B \-\-output
is not exactly equivalent to just piping the output to a file. By using a shell pipe, a newline will typically be prepended to the file (a quirk of the 
.I rich
library) and a progress bar will not be displayed even if the
.B \-\-quiet
option was not given.
.TP

